README.md, before:

## VectorHash - a very fast vectorized checksum algorithm

VectorHash is an extremely fast, non-cryptographic checksum algorithm. It is
primarily designed to create high quality checksums of files or buffers, but can
be used for other purposes as well. In this project the term hash will be used
as a synonym for checksum, even though the term hash has a broader definition
than checksum. In principle this algorithm can also be used to populate hash
tables, but in practice it will likely be too slow for that purpose if the keys
are small in size. This is because the minimum blocksize that the code can work
with is rather large compared to other algorithms.

This program has been written such that it can be vectorized using SIMD
instructions from the SSE2, AVX2, or AVX512f instruction sets, which makes it
very fast. It also has a scalar version for non-Intel platforms. The resulting
checksum is identical for each of these instruction sets. The fact that SIMD
instructions work on very wide registers, combined with the requirement that all
versions of the algorithm create identical checksums, results in the fact that
the minimum blocksize that the algorithm can handle is rather large. So the very
thing that makes the algorithm extremely fast on larger buffers, creates a lot
of overhead for very small keys. The algorithm will show its full speed for
buffers roughly 1-2 kiB and larger.

VectorHash has in part been inspired by the PRNG algorithm
[xoroshiro128++](https://prng.di.unimi.it/) written by David Blackman and
Sebastiano Vigna (for the core of the hashing function) and
[MurmurHash3](https://github.com/aappleby/smhasher/blob/master/src/MurmurHash3.cpp)
written by Austin Appleby (for the finalization mix and some support routines).

The algorithm can produce 32-, 64-, 128-, 256-, 512-, or 1024-bit checksums. It
has been extensively tested against SMHasher written by ZhuReini Urban and all
versions pass all the tests using commit 83fd13bc of SMHasher, except for the
speed test. The latter fails because it measures the speed for hashing very
small keys, which is not what the algorithm is designed for as was already
explained above. The test harness can be found [in this
repository](https://github.com/rurban/smhasher). The output of the test runs is
here:
[32bit](https://gitlab-as.oma.be/-/project/876/uploads/fbe63bb0ce514750edb41e084e539756/test_results_b47ad78c_32bit.txt),
[64bit](https://gitlab-as.oma.be/-/project/876/uploads/986b5d192f4a10c99d747946af5eab75/test_results_061162a3_64bit.txt),
[128bit](https://gitlab-as.oma.be/-/project/876/uploads/24045262a738d56a503362a224cb3ab7/test_results_83fd13bc_128bit.txt),
[256bit](https://gitlab-as.oma.be/-/project/876/uploads/e1c89df1dd45314d975e7108e495cd5a/test_results_83fd13bc_256bit.txt),
[512bit](https://gitlab-as.oma.be/-/project/876/uploads/4c137ca1af293c22be639a68fa056add/test_results_83fd13bc_512bit.txt),
[1024bit](https://gitlab-as.oma.be/-/project/876/uploads/98be7f8ff5bfc89119bebf185aa287f9/test_results_83fd13bc_1024bit.txt).

### Command line routines

After building and installing the code (see the separate file INSTALL.md for
this) you will have six executables called vh32sum, vh64sum, vh128sum, vh256sum,
vh512sum, and vh1024sum. These can produce checksums of any given file. They are
designed to be a plug-in replacement for other well-known checksum algorithms.
The actual checksums will be different of course, but the aim is to replicate
all command line options. This makes it easy to adapt scripts, etc. See the man
page included in this distribution for a more detailed description of the
options. In the remaining description only the name vh32sum will be used for
brevity, but all remarks apply implicitly to the other three executables as
well.

The four executables are in fact identical and are hard links to each other. The
code determines the width of the checksum by looking at the name of the
executable. If that name contains the string "32" it will produce a 32-bit
executable, and similarly for 64-, 128-, 256-, 512-, and 1024-bit checksums.
Other widths of the checksum are not supported. If it is not possible to
determine the width of the checksum this way, the width will default to 32 bits.
It is also possible to force the width with command line flags, e.g. the command
vh32sum \-l256 will produce a 256-bit checksum.

The vh32sum executable can handle multiple file names in a single invocation (as
long as you do not exceed the maximum command-line length of the shell).
Creating or checking checksums this way will be much faster than invoking
vh32sum separately for each individual file. So this practise is strongly
recommended.

The code will automatically detect if supported SIMD instructions are available
and use the highest set available. If you include the \--verbose flag, the code
will report which SIMD instruction set has been used. You can also override this
detection with command line options, e.g. vh32sum \--avx512 will force the code
to use the AVX512f instruction set, even if the hardware does not support those
instructions. You will get a crash on an illegal instruction in the latter case.
These flags are intended for testing and debugging and should not be needed in a
normal production environment.

The command vh32sum \--help will give a complete overview of all flags that are
supported.

The checksums of an empty file are as follows:

32 bit:  
<tt>7647d9bd</tt>

64 bit:  
<tt>73711a77d6031b6f</tt>

128 bit:   
<tt>fe82e7d9998e9819c7ac954ea0a0ea8e</tt>

256 bit:   
<tt>c87638f19f1778d7ee03dddc5c6677fd0701e532d311bfffddfc21c0ece8910a</tt>

512 bit:   
<tt>280f647d93f843b75627cc8c437084e2668a3cd9e077a2cf3186c67c990983c2</tt>
<tt>8ff8180187d362a79cb02cb49ba350a5e185e0050fc273e836b1db30571cfa66</tt>

1024 bit:   
<tt>c38bd292e55400931e47f4397b5266b3e143ffd918fb944c33ad908458a08c62</tt>
<tt>65e9c28007bf68301ab6f68c82ddcc2fa993ad69556b9ab4d588594ac4d02b5d</tt>
<tt>dd083a4cf1418b6522f06bff90a67bf93faaa719e1dbdbda3592deddbd1a8378</tt>
<tt>f0993653e73c292f338729c1efe01b352e90ed9a0ae01e613ad72736db619b2d</tt>

### The libvhsum library

After building and installing the code you will have a 64-bit static library
called <tt>libvhsum.a</tt>. This library exports a routine that will allow you
to perform a checksum on a buffer. The declaration for the call is:

    #include <vectorhash.h>
    void VectorHash(const void *buf, size_t len, uint32_t seed, void *out, size_t hw);

Here the variable <tt>buf</tt> is a pointer to the buffer that should be
checksummed, <tt>len</tt> is the length of the buffer, <tt>seed</tt> is the seed
for the checksum algorithm (use 0xfd4c799d to replicate the behavior of vh32sum,
etc, but any other value is fine too), <tt>out</tt> is a pointer to the buffer
that will be used to write the checksum into, and <tt>hw</tt> is the width of
the checksum (allowed values are 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, and 1024). The
declaration is contained in the header file <tt>vectorhash.h</tt>. A very simple
program using this library could contain:

    #include <vectorhash.h>
    // ...
    size_t len = 1048576; // 1 MiB, but any other size is fine too
    void *buf = malloc(len);
    // fill buffer...
    static const size_t hw = 256; // get a 256-bit hash
    uint32_t checksum[hw/32];
    VectorHash(buf, len, 0xfd4c799d, checksum, hw);

and would need to be compiled with a command like this:

    g++ test.cc -lvhsum -L/path/to/libdir

The <tt>-L</tt> parameter is only needed if the library is not installed in a
directory that is included in your <tt>LD_LIBRARY_PATH</tt>. The library is
written in C++, but can also be called from C programs (and even other languages
like e.g. Fortran) using one additional parameter:

	gcc test.c -lvhsum -L/path/to/libdir -lstdc++

The routine <tt>VectorHash</tt> will automatically determine the hardware
capabilities of the processor and use the appropriate version of the algorithm.
However, there is one caveat. Assuming your processor supports AVX512f
instructions, it will need to read 512 bits of data at once from memory. For
this the memory address (and hence also the start of the buffer) will need to
aligned on a 512-bit = 64-byte boundary (in other words, the last 6 bits of the
buffer address need to be zero). For AVX2 instructions 32-byte alignment is
needed, and for SSE2 instructions 16-byte alignment. The scalar version can work
on any buffer alignment (even odd addresses). If the buffer is not correctly
aligned, the code will automatically revert to a lower algorithm that does
support the provided buffer alignment. For instance, if the hardware supports
AVX512f instructions, but the buffer is aligned on a 16-byte boundary, the code
will actually use the SSE2 version of the algorithm since using the AVX512f or
AVX2 versions would have resulted in a segmentation violation.

In Linux, <tt>malloc()</tt> will typically return buffers aligned on a 16-byte
boundary, so special measures are needed to obtain buffers on a 32- or 64-byte
boundary. See [this
page](https://embeddedartistry.com/blog/2017/02/22/generating-aligned-memory/)
for a detailed discussion of how to obtain correctly aligned memory.

### Copyright

VectorHash is distributed with a [zlib open-source software
license](https://opensource.org/licenses/Zlib). You are free to change and
redistribute it. There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

### The cpuid library

VectorHash is distributed with a library for detecting CPU capabilities in the
cpuid subdirectory. This implementation was written by steinwurf. The software
can be found [in this repository](https://github.com/steinwurf/cpuid/). What is
contained in the cpuid subdirectory is a somewhat simplified version of the
9.0.1 release of cpuid. The most important modification is to remove the python
dependency for the build process. The original license and documentation have
been retained, so the latter still refers to the python build process, which no
longer works in this version. A simple Makefile has been added instead. The
cpuid library is distributed with a BSD-style copyright license.

### The unittest-cpp library

VectorHash is distributed with a library for unit tests in the unittest-cpp
subdirectory. This implementation was originally written by Noel Llopis and
Charles Nicholson. The software can be found [in this
repository](https://github.com/unittest-cpp/unittest-cpp). What is contained in
the unittest-cpp subdirectory is a somewhat simplified version of the 2.0.0
release. The most important modification is to remove the cmake dependency for
the build process. The original license and documentation have been retained, so
the latter still contains incorrect information about the build process. A
simple Makefile has been added instead. The unittest-cpp library is distributed
with an MIT/X copyright license.


Peter A.M. van Hoof   
Royal Observatory of Belgium   
p.vanhoof@oma.be

Commit message:

Update the test harness
 - Add numerous tests for the command-line executables.
 - Update README.md
 - When setting the checksum width with a command line parameter, also update
   the name of the algorithm.
 - When a checking run finds no properly formatted checksum lines, set the
   return code to 1.
 - Using both the --verbose and --status options should be considered a
   conflict.
 - Add a description of the exit codes to the man page of vh32sum.

README.md, after:

## VectorHash - a very fast vectorized checksum algorithm

VectorHash is an extremely fast, non-cryptographic checksum algorithm. It is
primarily designed to create high quality checksums of files or buffers, but can
be used for other purposes as well. In this project the term hash will be used
as a synonym for checksum, even though the term hash has a broader definition
than checksum. In principle this algorithm can also be used to populate hash
tables, but in practice it will likely be too slow for that purpose if the keys
are small in size. This is because the minimum blocksize that the code can work
with is rather large compared to other algorithms.

This program has been written such that it can be vectorized using SIMD
instructions from the SSE2, AVX2, or AVX512f instruction sets, which makes it
very fast. It also has a scalar version for non-Intel platforms. The resulting
checksum is identical for each of these instruction sets. The fact that SIMD
instructions work on very wide registers, combined with the requirement that all
versions of the algorithm create identical checksums, results in the fact that
the minimum blocksize that the algorithm can handle is rather large. So the very
thing that makes the algorithm extremely fast on larger buffers, creates a lot
of overhead for very small keys. The algorithm will show its full speed for
buffers roughly 1-2 kiB and larger.

VectorHash has in part been inspired by the PRNG algorithm
[xoroshiro128++](https://prng.di.unimi.it/) written by David Blackman and
Sebastiano Vigna (for the core of the hashing function) and
[MurmurHash3](https://github.com/aappleby/smhasher/blob/master/src/MurmurHash3.cpp)
written by Austin Appleby (for the finalization mix and some support routines).

The algorithm can produce 32-, 64-, 128-, 256-, 512-, or 1024-bit checksums. It
has been extensively tested against SMHasher written by ZhuReini Urban and all
versions pass all the tests using commit 83fd13bc of SMHasher, except for the
speed test. The latter fails because it measures the speed for hashing very
small keys, which is not what the algorithm is designed for as was already
explained above. The test harness can be found [in this
repository](https://github.com/rurban/smhasher). The output of the test runs is
here:
[32bit](https://gitlab-as.oma.be/-/project/876/uploads/fbe63bb0ce514750edb41e084e539756/test_results_b47ad78c_32bit.txt),
[64bit](https://gitlab-as.oma.be/-/project/876/uploads/986b5d192f4a10c99d747946af5eab75/test_results_061162a3_64bit.txt),
[128bit](https://gitlab-as.oma.be/-/project/876/uploads/24045262a738d56a503362a224cb3ab7/test_results_83fd13bc_128bit.txt),
[256bit](https://gitlab-as.oma.be/-/project/876/uploads/e1c89df1dd45314d975e7108e495cd5a/test_results_83fd13bc_256bit.txt),
[512bit](https://gitlab-as.oma.be/-/project/876/uploads/4c137ca1af293c22be639a68fa056add/test_results_83fd13bc_512bit.txt),
[1024bit](https://gitlab-as.oma.be/-/project/876/uploads/98be7f8ff5bfc89119bebf185aa287f9/test_results_83fd13bc_1024bit.txt).

### Command line routines

After building and installing the code (see the separate file INSTALL.md for
this) you will have six executables called vh32sum, vh64sum, vh128sum, vh256sum,
vh512sum, and vh1024sum. These can produce checksums of any given file. They are
designed to be a plug-in replacement for other well-known checksum algorithms.
The actual checksums will be different of course, but the aim is to replicate
all command line options. This makes it easy to adapt scripts, etc. See the man
page included in this distribution for a more detailed description of the
options. In the remaining description only the name vh32sum will be used for
brevity, but all remarks apply implicitly to the other three executables as
well.

The four executables are in fact identical and are hard links to each other. The
code determines the width of the checksum by looking at the name of the
executable. If that name contains the string "32" it will produce a 32-bit
executable, and similarly for 64-, 128-, 256-, 512-, and 1024-bit checksums.
Other widths of the checksum are not supported. If it is not possible to
determine the width of the checksum this way, the width will default to 32 bits.
It is also possible to force the width with command line flags, e.g. the command
vh32sum \-l256 will produce a 256-bit checksum.

The vh32sum executable can handle multiple file names in a single invocation (as
long as you do not exceed the maximum command-line length of the shell).
Creating or checking checksums this way will be much faster than invoking
vh32sum separately for each individual file. So this practise is strongly
recommended.

The code will automatically detect if supported SIMD instructions are available
and use the highest set available. If you include the \--verbose flag, the code
will report which SIMD instruction set has been used. You can also override this
detection with command line options, e.g. vh32sum \--avx512 will force the code
to use the AVX512f instruction set, even if the hardware does not support those
instructions. You will get a crash on an illegal instruction in the latter case.
These flags are intended for testing and debugging and should not be needed in a
normal production environment.

The command vh32sum \--help will give a complete overview of all flags that are
supported.

The checksums of an empty file are as follows. These can be reproduced with the
command

	echo -n | vh32sum

and similarly for other checksum widths.

32 bit:  
<tt>7647d9bd</tt>

64 bit:  
<tt>73711a77d6031b6f</tt>

128 bit:   
<tt>fe82e7d9998e9819c7ac954ea0a0ea8e</tt>

256 bit:   
<tt>c87638f19f1778d7ee03dddc5c6677fd0701e532d311bfffddfc21c0ece8910a</tt>

512 bit:   
<tt>280f647d93f843b75627cc8c437084e2668a3cd9e077a2cf3186c67c990983c2</tt>
<tt>8ff8180187d362a79cb02cb49ba350a5e185e0050fc273e836b1db30571cfa66</tt>

1024 bit:   
<tt>c38bd292e55400931e47f4397b5266b3e143ffd918fb944c33ad908458a08c62</tt>
<tt>65e9c28007bf68301ab6f68c82ddcc2fa993ad69556b9ab4d588594ac4d02b5d</tt>
<tt>dd083a4cf1418b6522f06bff90a67bf93faaa719e1dbdbda3592deddbd1a8378</tt>
<tt>f0993653e73c292f338729c1efe01b352e90ed9a0ae01e613ad72736db619b2d</tt>

### The libvhsum library

After building and installing the code you will have a 64-bit static library
called <tt>libvhsum.a</tt>. This library exports a routine that will allow you
to perform a checksum on a buffer. The declaration for the call is:

    #include <vectorhash.h>
    void VectorHash(const void *buf, size_t len, uint32_t seed, void *out, size_t hw);

Here the variable <tt>buf</tt> is a pointer to the buffer that should be
checksummed, <tt>len</tt> is the length of the buffer, <tt>seed</tt> is the seed
for the checksum algorithm (use 0xfd4c799d to replicate the behavior of vh32sum,
etc, but any other value is fine too), <tt>out</tt> is a pointer to the buffer
that will be used to write the checksum into, and <tt>hw</tt> is the width of
the checksum (allowed values are 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, and 1024). The
declaration is contained in the header file <tt>vectorhash.h</tt>. A very simple
program using this library could contain:

    #include <vectorhash.h>
    // ...
    size_t len = 1048576; // 1 MiB, but any other size is fine too
    void *buf = malloc(len);
    // fill buffer...
    static const size_t hw = 256; // get a 256-bit hash
    uint32_t checksum[hw/32];
    VectorHash(buf, len, 0xfd4c799d, checksum, hw);

and would need to be compiled with a command like this:

    g++ test.cc -lvhsum -L/path/to/libdir

The <tt>-L</tt> parameter is only needed if the library is not installed in a
directory that is included in your <tt>LD_LIBRARY_PATH</tt>. The library is
written in C++, but can also be called from C programs (and even other languages
like e.g. Fortran) using one additional parameter:

	gcc test.c -lvhsum -L/path/to/libdir -lstdc++

The routine <tt>VectorHash</tt> will automatically determine the hardware
capabilities of the processor and use the appropriate version of the algorithm.
However, there is one caveat. Assuming your processor supports AVX512f
instructions, it will need to read 512 bits of data at once from memory. For
this the memory address (and hence also the start of the buffer) will need to
aligned on a 512-bit = 64-byte boundary (in other words, the last 6 bits of the
buffer address need to be zero). For AVX2 instructions 32-byte alignment is
needed, and for SSE2 instructions 16-byte alignment. The scalar version can work
on any buffer alignment (even odd addresses). If the buffer is not correctly
aligned, the code will automatically revert to a lower algorithm that does
support the provided buffer alignment. For instance, if the hardware supports
AVX512f instructions, but the buffer is aligned on a 16-byte boundary, the code
will actually use the SSE2 version of the algorithm since using the AVX512f or
AVX2 versions would have resulted in a segmentation violation.

In Linux, <tt>malloc()</tt> will typically return buffers aligned on a 16-byte
boundary, so special measures are needed to obtain buffers on a 32- or 64-byte
boundary. See [this
page](https://embeddedartistry.com/blog/2017/02/22/generating-aligned-memory/)
for a detailed discussion of how to obtain correctly aligned memory.

### Copyright

VectorHash is distributed with a [zlib open-source software
license](https://opensource.org/licenses/Zlib). You are free to change and
redistribute the software. There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

### The cpuid library

VectorHash is distributed with a library for detecting CPU capabilities in the
cpuid subdirectory. This implementation was written by steinwurf. The software
can be found [in this repository](https://github.com/steinwurf/cpuid/). What is
contained in the cpuid subdirectory is a somewhat simplified version of the
9.0.1 release of cpuid. The most important modification is to remove the python
dependency for the build process. The original license and documentation have
been retained, so the latter still refers to the python build process, which no
longer works in this version. A simple Makefile has been added instead. The
cpuid library is distributed with a BSD-style copyright license.

### The unittest-cpp library

VectorHash is distributed with a library for unit tests in the unittest-cpp
subdirectory. This implementation was originally written by Noel Llopis and
Charles Nicholson. The software can be found [in this
repository](https://github.com/unittest-cpp/unittest-cpp). What is contained in
the unittest-cpp subdirectory is a somewhat simplified version of the 2.0.0
release. The most important modification is to remove the cmake dependency for
the build process. The original license and documentation have been retained, so
the latter still contains incorrect information about the build process. A
simple Makefile has been added instead. The unittest-cpp library is distributed
with an MIT/X copyright license.


Peter A.M. van Hoof   
Royal Observatory of Belgium   
p.vanhoof@oma.be
